# Triggers

## Content Overview

1. Trigger Templates
2. Which trigger is best for your need?
3. Create a timer triger to invoke a function on consistent schedule.
4. Create an HTTPtrigger to invoke Azure Function when HTTP request is received.
5. Create a blob trigger to invoke a function when a blob is created or updated in Azure Storage.
   <br>

---

<br>

### **What are triggers?**

Triggers are responsible for executing an Azure Function.

1. It determines how an Azure Function is invoked.
   > If you want a function to execute every 10 minutes. You can use a _timer trigger_.
2. Every function must have exactly one trigger associated with it.
3. If you logic runs under multiple conditions, you need to create multiple Azure functions that share same core function.
4. Common types of triggers:
   - Timer: Executes a function at a set interval.
   - HTTP: Executes a function when a HTTP request is received.
   - Blob: Executes function when a file is uploaded or updated in Azure Blob Storage.
   - Queue: Executes a function when a message is added to an Azure Storage Queue.
   - Azure CosmosDB: Which executes a function when a document changes in a collection.
   - Event Hub: Executes a function when an Event Hub receives a new event.

### **What are Bindings**

It is a connection to data within your function.

1. These are optional.
2. Can be input or output bindings.
3. Input binding is the data that function receives.
4. Output binding is data that your function sends.
   > Unlike triggers a function can have multiple input and output bindings

<br>

**Use Case 1**

Imagine a salon schedules customer appointments to book slots when customer can get their hair done.  
The Salon looses money if the customer don't show up.  
The Salon reaches out to software developer to build solution for them.  
The solution involves sending out reminder texts to customers.  
Each morninng you will send customer a message with an appointment that day.
These can be scheduled as soon as the appointment is scheduled or changed.

**_Requirements:_** A service that can be easily scheduled, updated, and scaled.

**_App:_** You decide to go with Azure Functions to build the solution.

We already know how to implement logic to send text messages using Azure Function from previous module.  
Now we know how to send message at a specific time or when a specific event triggers.

**Use Case 2**

You notice your subscribers are not reading your most recent blog posts.  
You decide the best action is to send an email once a week to remind them to check your blog.

**_App:_** You implement this logic using Azure Function app with timer trigger to invoke your function weekly.

---

<br>

### **Timer Trigger**

Trigger that executes a function at a consistent interval.  
Creating a timer requires 2 things:

- A **timestamp** parameter name: Acts as the identifier to access the triggering code.
- **Schedule** which is a _cron expression_ that sets the interval for the timer.

**Cron Expression**

A cron expression is string that consists of 6 fields that represet set of times.  
Order of fields in Azure is: **{sec} {min} {hour} {day} {month} {day of week}**

- An \* selects all values in the field. Like an asterisk in day of the week field means every day of the week.
- Comma seperates items in a list. (1,3) in the week field means just Mondays day 1 and Wednesday day 3.
- Hyphen specifies a range. (10-12) in hour field means a range that includes the hours 10, 11 and 12.
- Slash specifies an increment. \*/10 in minutes field means an increment every 10 minutes.

A trigger that executes every 5 minutes: `0 */5 * * * *`

- Here seconds field supports values 0-59 (0 means 1 second)
- The minutes field contains 2 special chars. \* means select all possible values from 0 - 59. / represents increment. Combining both we get "For all values from 0 - 59 select every 5th value.
- Remaining 4 values are \* which represents to select every possible value.
- Combining all it is read as "The first second of every fifth minute of every hour, of every day, of every month"

**Creating Timer Trigger**

When creating a function select Timer Trigger template.  
Supply a timestamp parameter name and a cron expression.

> Triggers can also be created using Core Tools, Visual Studio or VS Code.
