# Core Tools

Are commands line utilities that enables you to run functions locally and publish them to Azure.

## Module Overview

1. Create new functions projects and functions.

2. Use Azure Core tools to create functions locally.

3. Prepare the code and use Azure CLI to create a function app and publish and then invoke it over the web.

<br>

---

<br>

**Use Case:**

Suppose you are developer for car dealership chain.

Your manager has decided to build a set of application and the first service he would like to build involves laon interests calculation.

Create functions that can be called over the web to run loan interest calculations.

We have decided to use Azure Core tools to build and publish a function.

<br>

**What are Core tools?**

Are a set of command line tools that you can use to develop and test Azure functions on your local computer.

1. Prime focus is to generate the files and folders you need to develop functions on your local computer.

2. Run the functions locally in order to test and debug them.

3. Publish to Azure.

Core tools are packaged as single command line utility using the command `func`.

- These are standalone utilities and not part of a large IDE.

- Use any text editor and develop and test using cmd line.

- Need to login to Azure CLI and Azure PowerShell to perform other tasks.

- Functions related features and Azure functions extension in Visual Studio code are build on top of the core tools.

<br>

**Local Development vs Azure Portal Development**

Portal does not support working with functions developed locally.

If use Core tools locally, do not expect to be able to use Portal to make changes to functions.

<br>

---

<br>

### Function Apps and Functions Projects

1. Every function belongs to a function app which is a collection of functions that are published together into same environment.

   - All functions in a functions app share the configuration values.

   - All functions must be build for the same language runtime.

   - Each function app is an Azure resource that can be configured and managed independently.

2. When you develop functions locally, you work within functions project, a folder that contains code and configuration files that define your functions.

   - A functions project on a computer is equivalent to function app in Azure.
   - It can contain multiple functions that use the same language runtime.

<br>

**Preparing Project Folder**

To get started you need to create a functions project folder and organize it correctly.

Every new function that you add to the project requries additional code files and config that must be complete and correctly structured.

> function-name1
>
> - host.json
> - localsettings.json
> - package.json

> You can use Core tools to generate projects and functions from scratch.

<br>

To create a new function project from core tools:

**1. func init**

first run `func init` in cmd prompt and select language runtime.

Files in the project depend on the language runtime you select.

> host.json and local.setting.json are always present no matter the language runtime.

<br>

_host.json_ stores runtime configuration values like logging options for the function app.
Stored settings are used both locally and in Azure.

_Local.settings.json_ stores configuration values for local function app that only apply to the function app when it is run locally with the core tools.
Contains 2 settings:

- Local runtime settings used to config local functions runtime itself and
- Custom application settings which you can add and configure based on your apps needs and can be accessed and used by all the functions in the app.

<br>

**2. func new**

Running the `func new` command will create a new function and all the files you need to get started developing.

This would ask you which function trigger you want to use and what name would like to give the function.

The starter code of the trigger can be replaced with the body of the function of your implementation.

<br>

**3. func start**

Functions cannot run on their own locally and must be hosted by the functions host.

Host powers everything outside the function code.

- Loads configuration, listens for triggers and http requests, starts the worker request for the language your functions are written in.

- Writes log output and more in Azure functions apps.

> Core tools can run their own instance of the functions host and try out your functions locally before your publish them.
>
> You can also test your functions by making real http calls to them without the need for Azure resources.

To start the function locally, run the command `func start` from the functions project folder.

At the end of the display, core tools will display local URLs that you can use to call each of your functions.

While the host is running you can also run any libraries like curl to make that http call to interact with function.

<br>

**Labs**

[Exercise - Create a function locally by using the Core Tools](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/develop-test-deploy-azure-functions-with-core-tools/3-exercise-create-function-core-tools)

<br>

**Publish a function to Azure**

Before publishing your functions to Azure, you need to create Function app resource in Azure.

Creating resource is the responsibility of Azure Portal, Azure PowerShell or Azure CLI.

You need to ensure that your local function uses the same language runtime and language as the function app created in Azure. If not the publishing will halt with an error.

To publish you code:

```bash
func azure functionapp publish learnfunctionsa96fe9bc79
```

In above cmd "learnfunctionsa96fe9bc79" is the target function app name present in Azure.

Core tools don't ask you to authenticate to publish your app.
They would access your subscriptions and resources by loading session information from Azure PowerShell or Azure CLI. Without an active session publishing will fail.

Ones the cmd is executed and completed your function are up and running in Azure.

The final output from core tools is the invokation URL of each function.

> Core tools do not validate or test your functions code during publishing.
> Ensure to test using `func start` before publishing. When you publish your functions already present in target app. Those functions are stopped and deleted before the contents of your project are deployed.
> We cannot publish functions from different projects into a target app in sequence and expect them all to be present.
> All function you want in an app must be in one project.
> By default core tools configure HTTP functions with an authorization level of _function_.

<br>

**Labs**

[Exercise - Publish a function to Azure by using the Core Tools](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/develop-test-deploy-azure-functions-with-core-tools/5-exercise-publish-function-core-tools)
