# Function Integration

Functions can be integrated with data and services using bindings.

**Module Overview**

1. Access Data sources through bindings.
2. Read data from Auzre Cosmos DB by using functions.
3. Store data in Azure Cosmos DB by using Azure Functions.
4. Send messages to Azure Queue Storage using Azure Functions.

<br>

---

<br>

**Use Case 1**

You run a social networking site for professionals.
You allow them to upload their headshot images to be posted on their profile. (Images uploaded to DB)
You want an image thumbnail and save it to permanent storage.
To reduce load on web server you create a serverless backend using Azure Functions to process this data. (Functions can process images as soon as they are uploaded and update thumbnails to DB)

<br>

### **Accessing Data**

<br>

**Other Use Cases**

1. Move incomming data from Blob Storage to Cosmos DB.
2. You want to post incomming messages to Queue for processing by another component.
3. Your service needs to grab gamers scores from a queue and update in Online Scoreboard.

All cases involve a Data Source being accessed by a function and writing to Target (Data Sink)

<br>

**Bindings**

Bindings provide a declarative way to connect to your data from within your code.

Multiple bindings can be configured to access different data elements.

Powerful in terms that you do not have to develop any connections to databases or Web API interfaces.

Binding types: The type of binding defines if we are reading or sending data.

- Input Bindings: Our function can read data from these inputs.
- Output Bindings: Connects to a data destination. Our functions can write data to these destinations.
  > A function can have multiple input and output bindings.

<br>

> **Triggers**
>
> As covered before Triggers are special types of bindings that cause a function to run.
>
> - An Azure Event Grid trigger can be configured as a trigger.
> - When this event occurs the function will run.

There is a large selection of bindings to interact directly with various Azure Services as well as 3rd party services.

A function can write to a blob storage output binding, but the blob storage update could trigger another function.

<br>

**Common bindings**

- Blob Storage binding:
  - Input binding: Can read contents of a file in blob storage
  - Output binding: Create a new file in blob storage.
- Azure Cosmos DB:
  - Input: Lookup a document in the Cosmos DB databse.
  - Output: Create a new document in a databse.
- Azure Queue Storage:
  - Output: Post a message to a queue
- Azure Service Bus Queues
- Azure Event Hubs
- External files
- External tables
- HTTP endpoints
- 3rd Party like SendGrid for sending out emails or Twilio for sending messages.
- and more...

<br>

**Bindings Properties**

Additional depends on binding type and storage being used.

1. Name: Defines function parameter through which you access data. Eg: In a queue message binding, this is the name of a function that receives queue message content.
2. Type: Defines the type of binding, for example, the type of data or service we want to interact with.
3. Direction: Is it input or output binding?
4. Connection (Needed by most but not all): Bindings use connection strings stored in app settings to keep secrets out of the function code.

Bindings are defined in Functions configuration file which is named function.json  
Lives in the same folder as function code.

<br>

**Exploring Binding content**

1. name: Provides the value for the name variable. A variable that holds the blob data. (This is where the data is provided and stored)
2. type: Provide the storage type. Example blob.
3. path: **Binding expression** which specifies the _container_ and _item_ that goes in it.
4. connection: Provide the connection string setting name as defined in the application settings file. This is used as a key to find the connection string to connect to your storage account.
5. direction: Finally need to define the direction, "in" cause this binding will read data from blob.

```JSON
{
    "name": "headshotBlob",
    "type": "blob",
    "path": "thumbnail-images/{filename}",
    "connection": "HeadshotStorageConnection",
    "direction": "in"
}
```

In this example we used an input binding to connect user images (data) to be processed by our function as thumbnails.

<br>

**What is a binding expression?**

A binding expression is specialized text in function.json, or code that is evaluated when the function is invoked.  
For example, if you have a blob storage binding, you could use a binding expression that will allow our function to access the name of the file that triggered the function inside the container. Eg: `"thumbnail-images/{filename}"` specifies{filename} which is the name of the file.

Types of binding expressions:

- App settings
- Trigger filename
- Trigger metadata
- JSON payloads
- New GUID
- Current date and time

<br>

**Lab**

[Create an HTTP trigger using Javascript](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/chain-azure-functions-data-using-bindings/3-explore-input-and-output-binding-types-portal-lab?pivots=javascript)

<br>

## **Reading Data with Input bindings**

To connect to a data source, you need to configure an _input binding_.

**Use Case**

You want to create a bookmark lookup service. If users want to find an entry, they send a request (HTTP request) with the ID of the entry, and our function returns the URL.

1. When a user sends an HTTP request with the `id` query, the function is triggered.
2. The `id` query parameter is passed to the Azure Cosmos DB input binding.
3. If the database finds a document that matches this ID, the `bookmark` parameter will be set to the located document.
   > In the above labs _"Read data with input bindings"_ , the logic code constructs a response that contains the URL value that is found in the corresponding document of the database.
4. If no document is found matching this key, the request would respond with a payload and status code that tells the user the bad news.

Summary:

- The data stored is an Azure Cosmos DB instance.
- You configure an input binding to connect and read data.

<br>

## **Writing Data with Input bindings**
