# Build Data Warehouse

### **Module Overview**

1. What makes a Modern Data Warehouse?

2. Intro to BigQuery

3. Getting started with BigQuery

4. Load Data into BigQuery

5. Schemas

6. Schema Design

7. Nested and Repeated Fields

8. Optimize tables in Data Warehouse with Partitioning and Clustering

---

<br>

### **What makes a modern Data Warehouse?**

An enterprise Data warehouse should consolidate data from many sources.

A DW imposes a schema while data lake is just raw data.

A Data Warehouse make it available for querying and data processing.

An analyst needs to know the schema of the data to use a Data Warehouse however does not need to write code to read and parse the data.

Another reason to consolidate data besides standardizing the format of data is making sure the queried results are meaningful; clean, accurate and consistent

The purpose of DW is not to store data as it is of Data Lake.

It's important to ensure that the queries made to DW are quick.

**What makes it modern?**

- Single DW that can scale from Gigabytes to Petabytes of data.
- Serverless and no-ops, not based on clusters that need to be managed or indexes that need to be fine tuned.
- Supports rich visualization and reporting.
- Modern DW should be able to integrate with ecosystem of processing tools for building ETL pieplines.
- Up to the minute data. Able to stream data not batch updates.
- Support Machine Learning without moving data out of the warehouse.
- Possible to impose security like data exfiltration constraints. Share data with collaborators.

<br>

### **BigQuery**

- Able to scale form gigabytes to petabytes seamlessly.
- Able to perform Ad-hoc queries and no-ops.
- BigQuery is similar to the cost of Cloud Storage while providing storage and querying. No need to worry about archiving off older data to save on storage.
- Features like GIS and ML built in.
- Provides capability for real-time data analysis.
- All security while able to share datasets and queries.
- Supports standard SQL queries and is compatible with ANSI SQL 2011.

**Features**

- Serverless.
- Updating a table expiration at the time of table creation.
- BigQuery does not run any vacuum processes that runs at various intervals to reshuffle and sort data blocks to recover space. This is because storage engine continuously manages and optimizes stored data and replication.
- BigQuery does not run indexes on tables. No need to rebuild these.
- No need to worry about common data management tasks.

**Speed**

1. BigQuery tables are column oriented compared to traditional RDBM tables which are row oriented.

2. BigQuery is OLAP system and meant for analytics. Tables are immutable and optimized for reading and appending data. Not optimized for updating.

3. BigQuery leverages the fact that most queries have few columns so it only reads the columns required for query.

4. Row oriented are efficient for making updates to data containing fields. For OLTP systems, row oriented system are necessary as they have frequent updates.

5. Analytics is slow on row oriented tables because they have to read all the fields in a row.

**Implementation**

BigQuery is implemented as a Storage Engine and an Analytical engine.

BigQuery data is physically stored on Google's distributed file system called Colossus.

No need to provision resources before using BigQuery unlike Cloud SQL and other RDBMS systems. BigQuery allocates storage resources dynamically based on usage patterns.

Query resources are allocated based on Query type and complexity. Each query comprises of slots which are units of computation. All BigQuery customers have access to 2000 slots of query operations.

Pricing model for reserved slots is available for customers that want more predictable pricing. However reserving 10,000 slots when having 15,000 slots of consumption can result in each query executign more slowly.

<br>

### **Get started with BigQuery**
