# Big Data with Big Query

**Course Topics**

1. BigQuery offers two services: Storage and Analytics
2. How BigQuery ML provides a data-to-ai lifecycle all in one place.
3. BigQuery ML project phases
4. BigQuery ML key commands.

---

### **Intro**

1. **BigQuery** is fully-managed data warehouse.

2. Data Warehouse is a large store containing terabytes and petabytes of data gathered from wide range of sources within an organization.

3. This data is used to guide management decisions.

4. Being fully managed means that BigQuery takes care of the underlying infrastrucutre.

5. Key Features:

   - Storage + Analytics. Can store petabytes of data. Can perform ML, Geospatial analysis and business intelligence.
   - Serverless
   - Flexible pay-as-you-go. Pay for query processed or use flat rate option.
   - Data encrypted at rest.
   - Built in ML. Can also export models from BigQuery to **Vertex AI** for seamless integration.

6. Typical Data warehouse solution architecture:

   1. The input data can be either real time or batch data.
   2. If it's streaming data, structured or unstructured, **Pub/Sub** is needed to digest the data.
   3. If it's batch data it can be directly uploaded to cloud storage.
   4. After that both pipelines lead to **Dataflow** where we extract transform and load the data.
   5. **BigQuery** sits in the middle which is the common staging. It links data processing and data access through analytics. The job of analytics engine of BigQuery is to ingest processed data and analyze it. Post that possibly output the data to either Business Intelligence tools bucket or AI/ML tools.
   6. Business Intelligence tools comprise of **Looker, Data Studio, Tableau, Google Sheets**
   7. AI/ML tools comprise of **AutoML, Vertex AI workbench**

<br>

### **Storage and Analytics**

1. BigQuery provides two services _Storage_ and _Analytical engine_.
2. Both are connected by Google's highspeed internal network.
3. Can ingest data from various sources
   - Internal: Within BigQuery
   - External: Other google cloud storage services.
     > Using Dataflow to process data before streaming into BigQuery can remove inconsistency.
   - Muti-Cloud data: AWS or Azure
   - Public datasets: Marketplace
4. Patterns to loads data into BigQuery:
   - Batch load
   - Streaming
   - Generated data
5. BigQuery can run analytical queries over large datasets.
   - Query terabytes in seconds
   - Query petabytes in minutes.
6. Supports following features:
   - Ad hoc analysis by running SQL queries on large datasets.
   - Geospatial analysis
   - ML models using SQL.
   - Buildign BI dashboards.
7. Can execute queries as needed or in batches i.e.. queries start when resources are available.

<br>

### **BigQuery ML**

Build and training models can be very time intensive.

1. You must first export data from your datastore into an IDE.

2. Transform the data and perform feature engineering.

3. Build the model in Tensorflow and train it locally or on a VM.

4. To improve performance, you need to get more data and create new features.

5. And cycle repeats.

<br>

**BigQuery ML**

Now you can create and execute ML models on your structured datasets in BigQuery using SQL queries.

1. Step 1: Create a model with SQL statement.
2. Step 2: Write a SQL prediction query and invoke `ml.PREDICT`
3. You now have a model. Additional activities may include evaluating a model.
4. Training a model can extend to _Hyperparameters_ which let you tune the model to achieve best results. BigQuery can automatically tune hyperparameters or you can manually control hyperparameters.
5. Google BigQuery ML supports 2 models:
   - _Supervised models_
     - Classify data? Use **Logistic regression**.
     - Predict a number? Use **Linear regression**.
   - _Unsupervised models_
     - Identify patterns and clusters? Use Cluster analysis.
6. Also supports ML Ops.
   - Importing Tensorflow models
   - Exporting models from BigQuery ML
   - Hyperparameter tuning using Cloud AI Vizier.
